The shopping cart abandonment rate is an important metric for ecommerce sites to keep track of because a high abandonment rate could signal a poor user experience or broken sales funnel. Reducing shopping cart abandonment leads directly to more sales and revenue, so optimizing the checkout flow is a core area of focus for many online retailers.

Cart abandonment rates peak in December when Black Friday and holiday sales lure impulsive shoppers.

Research from Baymard Institute shows that 69.82% of online shopping carts are abandoned.

In other words, for every 10 customers who add an item to their shopping cart, seven of them leave without completing the purchase. Ecommerce stores lose $18 billion in sales revenue annually because of cart abandonment.

The average eCommerce store loses 75% of their sales to digital cart abandonment.



why visitors are abandoning their carts?
1. Lack of trust: people still prefer to have a look before paying online.
2. mode of payment: people still prefer cash on delivery
3. second page drop off: loose interest in product. solution: limited time incentives
4. High shopping costs: this happens mostly because of shipping charges. We can provide promos on shipping charges      waiver.
5. Complex checkout process: Online shoppers have low attention span, keep checkout process easy and swift.
6. Window shoppers: To entice window shoppers, incentivize them with promotional offers and creating sense of urgency
7. Lack of Payment Options: Some products don't have COD, provide other methods but with incentives
8. High Price: Provide coupons to regular users and provide limited period offers to new users.
9. Technical Issues: Daily review of analytics and confirming the load time is within the attention span of users.
10. Mandatory Account Creation: People don't want to put so much effort for just a one time purchase.
11. No Discounts or promocodes to Regular Users. Promos only for new users.
12. Longer Delivery times: 
13. Bad Return and refund policy, New Return to service centre policy of amazon.
14. Payment Security Concerns
15. Product Quantity restrictions: Some products have a fixed buying quantity, like you cant buy a single Dr oetkar mayo, You need to buy at least two. This annoys the user.
16. Comparison Shopping: Most of the time people find cheaper cost of same product on another websites
17. 



Possible solutions to cart abandonment
1. Send abandon cart emails with some coupon codes to entice them to purchase the product. Tailored content makes consumers 40% more likely to engage with ads and make a purchase.
2. Ads regarding the abandonee products specifically so that user can remember that they abandoned the cart.
3. A/B Testing
4. Facilitate new users: Providing Guest Checkout options to new users, but need account for second purchase from same IP.
5. Keep product in mind: Include thumbnail of product pics and info through out the checkout process. In case user add multiple products to cart, they might forget a few of them, so thumbnails will direct their minds to the cart.
6. Progress UI: Including a eye catching progress bar for checkout will assure the user that the pricess is not too long and they will continue with checkout.
7. Checkout Reminder: if a customer adds an item to their cart but doesn’t initiate the checkout flow, you can set a pop-up to remind customers
8. Navigation: Keep the UI as easy as possible so that the user can navigate from cart to product list as soon as they click.
9. Support: Chat support for each and every product in the order list. Hustle free customer support.
10. Credible Social Reviews: If user gets a feeling that the reviews are paid, They wont buy. Keep those reviews on top which look credible.
11. Proof of credibility through signals: National or international standards comparison to quality of product and its manufacturing standards.
12. Exit intent pop up to remind them to do checkout before exiting.
13. 


Calculation
Shopping cart abandonment rate is calculated by dividing the total number of completed transactions by the number of initiated sales. (adds to basket). 

Potential KPI: Cart Abandonment Rate
